---
tags: [english]
---


## Summary of House Boy

Toundi Ondoua, the rural African protagonist of Houseboy, encounters a world of prisms that cast beautiful but unobtainable glimmers, especially for black youth in colonial Cameroon. Houseboy, written in the form of Toundi's captivating diary and translated from the original French, discloses his awe of the white world and a web of unpredictable experiences. Early on, he escapes his father's angry blows by seeking asylum with his benefactor father Gilbert, the local European priest. He asks the amused by seeking asylum with his benefactor Father Gilbert, the Toundi's father disagrees with the practice, Father Gilbert accepts Toundi, He soon learns to read and write, and becomes the houseboy, or servant of Father Gilbert. Toundi accompanies him to Dangan and begins work at the Saint Peter Catholic Mission. While at the mission, Toundi observes the lives of both the native Africans and the writers who come to pray and pay their respects. But later on, Father Gilbert meets an untimely death. Toundi then becomes "the Chief European's 'boy'--the dog of the Commandant." When the commandants wife, Madame, arrived from Paris, she was conveyed by all men. She had an affair with the prison director, M.Moreau. Toundi found Himself stuck in the middle of that affair, being the messenger against his will. Others warn Toundi that he is involved in matters that will only end in harm for him, but he continues nonetheless. When the Commandant finds out that Madame is having an affair, all hell breaks loose at the Residence. At the end of the complicated events through the novel, Toundi is viewed as person standing in judgement by all sides of the affair. As a result, he is used as a scapegoat and blamed for crimes he has not committed. He is beaten badly, so much so that he dies after fleeing to Spanish's Guinea. Toundi's attempt to fufills a dream of advancement and improvement opens his eyes to troubling realities. Gradually, preconceptions of the Europeans come crashing down on him as he struggles with his identity, his place in society, and the changing culture. It is explained in the prologue that Toundi dies so the reader already knows. The narrative is therefore an unraveling, meant to show exactly how this once carefree individual ended up on his deathbed, in a country not his own, and with a sobering story that deserves to be told as a cautionary tale against the abuse of power and the effects of racism. 

## Recap

- Toundi Ondoua, the rural African protagonist of Houseboy - Houseboy is written in the form of Toundi's captivating diary - It is located in colonial Cameron - His father becomes angry at Toundi for going to Father' Gilbert, the local European priest - He asked the priest to become his Houseboy, he soon learns to read and write - Toundi accompanies him to Dangan and begins to work at the Saint Peter Catholic Mission - Father Gilbert dies and Toundi becomes "The chief European's 'boy'-- the dog of the Commandant." - The commandant's wife was conveyed by all men and she had an affair with the prison director Mr. Moreau - Toundi found himself stuck in the middle of that affair, being the messenger against his will - Others warn Toundi that he is involved in matters that will only end in harm for him but he doesn't listen - The commandant finds out that Madame is having an affair, and he becomes mad - At the end of the entanglements, Toundi is viewed as as a person standing in judgement by all sides of the affair - As a result he is used as a scapegoat and blamed for crimes he has not committed - He is beaten badly that he died from his injuries after fleeting to Spanish Guinea - Toundi's attempt to fulfill a dream of advancement and improvement opens his eyes to troubling realities - Gradually, preconceptions of the Europeans came crashing down on him as he struggles with his identity, his place in society and changing culture ***- It is explained in the prologue that Toundi dies so the reader already knows. The narrative is therefore an unravelling, meant to show exactly how this once carefree individual ended up on his deathbed, in a country not hos own, and with sobering story that deserves to be told as a cautionary tale against the abuse of power and the effects of racism***

## Characters

- **Toundi Ondoua (Joseph) {Houseboy}**: - He is the main character, whose activities were in the colonial ruled Cameroon - He is forced to live away from his family due to both his father harshness and brutality and family poverty - He represents poor African children whose life is full of messiness/problems that are from birth to death